[docs] Custom indexer (#22995)
MystenLabs/sui: docs/content/guides/developer/advanced/custom-indexer.mdx

Reviewer: imo, this section should be put under "Custom Indexing Framework" as a sub-section. This is a critical section and we would love users to jump to it at the beginning

---

> title: Build a Custom Indexer

Reviewer: Maybe we should make it more clear that is the the codelab? Either:

1. "Build your first Custom Indexer", which is consistent with "Your first Sui dApp" (https://docs.sui.io/guides/developer/first-app)
or 2. "Build a Custom Indexer Codelab"

WDYT?

> title: Build Your First Custom Indexer

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: Build a Custom Indexer
```

:::

## Prerequisites

Before starting this exercise, ensure you have:

### Required software

You need the following stack installed on your machine.

- [Rust and Cargo](https://rustup.rs/)
- [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/download/)
- [Diesel CLI](https://diesel.rs/guides/getting-started#installing-diesel-cli)

If you're unsure whether your system has the necessary software properly installed, you can verify installation with the following commands.

```sh
$ psql --version
$ diesel --version
```

To test PostgreSQL functionality, you can create and delete a test table.

```sh
$ createdb test_db && dropdb test_db
```

If you receive a new prompt with no console output, the test was successful. If you receive a `createdb` error similar to

```sh
createdb: error: connection to server on socket "/tmp/.s.PGSQL.5432" failed: FATAL:  role "username" does not exist
```

then you need to create the user (replace `username` with the name provided in your error message).

```sh
$ sudo -u postgres createuser --superuser username
```

> Enter the password for your pgAdmin account when prompted, then try the `createdb && dropdb` command again.

Reviewer 2: I would remove this in favor of adding something to lines 112/113 about "If you get this error, then you need to create the user"

I'll make a suggestion there

Author: Leaving because L42 runs the test that might produce the error. Let me know if I'm missing something.

:::

> This guide walks you through building a complete custom indexer using the `sui-indexer-alt-framework`. The guide instructs how to create a sequential pipeline that extracts transaction digests from Sui checkpoints and stores them in a local PostgreSQL. You can find the [source code for the framework](https://github.com/MystenLabs/sui/tree/main/crates/sui-indexer-alt-framework) in the Sui repo on GitHub.

Reviewer 2: For future style guide discussions: I think phrases like "This guide walks you through.." or similar wording isn't always necessary, and most time reads better when revised without. This isn't important for this PR, but just wanted to note that for future discussions around word choice.

:::tip

While this guide uses PostgreSQL with [Diesel](https://diesel.rs/guides/getting-started) (a popular Rust ORM and query builder) for minimalism and out-of-the-box support, the `sui-indexer-alt-framework` is designed for flexible storage. You can {/*[**Bring Your Own Store (BYOS)**](https://www.notion.so/Bring-Your-Own-Store-BYOS-2336d9dcb4e980db9a06c88248125910?pvs=21)*/} use different databases (such as [MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com/), [CouchDB](https://couchdb.apache.org/), or similar) or utilize other database clients if you prefer not to use Diesel. To achieve this, implement the framework's `Store` and `Connection` traits and define your database write logic directly within your `Handler::commit()` method.

:::

## Prerequisites

Before starting this exercise, ensure you have:

### Required software

> You need the following stack installed on your machine.

Reviewer 2: We should make this prereq section tabs for different OS and then include the direct commands they need, like `brew install postgresql@15`, rather than forcing them to click the link and find out for themselves. This will save them time and make it easier for them to get going faster, rather than get frustrated with something simple like prereqs

### Recommended reading

Read the [Custom Indexing Framework](../../../concepts/custom-indexing-framework.mdx) and [Indexer Pipeline Architecture](../../../concepts/custom-indexer/pipeline-architecture.mdx) topics first to understand the overall architecture and concurrent pipeline concepts.

## What this guide builds

This guide demonstrates how to create an indexer that:

- Connects to Sui Testnet: Uses the remote checkpoint store at https://checkpoints.testnet.sui.io.
- Processes checkpoints: Streams checkpoint data continuously.
- Extracts transaction data: Pulls transaction digests from each checkpoint.
- Stores in local PostgreSQL: Commits data to a local PostgreSQL database.
- Implements sequential pipeline: Uses in-order processing with batching for optimal consistency and performance.

In the end, you have a working indexer that demonstrates all core framework concepts and can serve as a foundation for more complex custom indexers.

:::info

Sui provides checkpoint stores for both Mainnet and Testnet.

- Testnet: `https://checkpoints.testnet.sui.io`
- Mainnet: `https://checkpoints.mainnet.sui.io`

:::

##step Project setup

> First, open your terminal or console to the directory you want to store your indexer project. Use the `cargo new` command to create your Rust project and then navigate your terminal or console to its directory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, open your terminal or console to the directory you want to store your indexer project. Use the `cargo new` command to create a new Rust project and then navigate your terminal or console to its directory.
```

```sh
cargo new simple-sui-indexer
```
```sh

> cd simple-sui-indexer

Reviewer 2: Any specific reason this is split into two different blocks and not just one? Ideally, they only have to copy once and get both commands

Author: The reason is because we use `$` to prefix shell commands (not done on this doc yet). The current script that strips that out from the copy command assumes a single line. Would just need to adjust that script.

Reviewer 2: Is adjusting that a fairly low effort? I think it'd lead to a better dev experience in the long run.

```

##step Configure dependencies

> Replace your `Cargo.toml` with the following configuration and save. You can use an editor of your choice, but the instructions use Visual Studio Code (VS Code) for demonstration. Replace those instructions as needed for your environment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Replace the contents of the `Cargo.toml` file with the following configuration and save. 
```

> ```sh
> code Cargo.toml
> ```
> Replace the code in the manifest with the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

 
{@inject: examples/rust/basic-sui-indexer/Cargo.toml}

The manifest now includes the following dependencies:

- `sui-indexer-alt-framework`: Core framework providing pipeline infrastructure.
- `diesel/diesel-async`: Type-safe database ORM with async support.
- `tokio`: Async runtime required by the framework.
- `clap`: Command-line argument parsing for configuration.
- `anyhow`: Error handling and async-trait for trait implementations.
- `dotenvy`: Ingest .env file that stores your PostgreSQL URL. 

##step Create database

Before configuring migrations, create and verify your local PostgreSQL database:

> Create the database:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

```sh
createdb sui_indexer
```

Get your connection details:

```sh
psql sui_indexer -c "\conninfo"
```

> If successful your terminal or console should display a message similar to the following:

Reviewer 2: another "terminal or console" note

```sh
You are connected to database "sui_indexer" as user "username" via socket in "/tmp" at port "5432".
```

> You can now set a variable to your database URL as it's used in following commands. Make sure to change `username` to your actual username.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You should now set a variable store to your database URL, as it will be used in following commands. Make sure to change `username` to your actual username.
```

```sh
PSQL_URL=postgres://username@localhost:5432/sui_indexer
``` 

You can now test your connection with the following command:

```sh
psql $PSQL_URL -c "SELECT 'Connected';"
```

If successful, your console or terminal should respond with a message similar to the following:

```sh
?column?
-----------
 Connected
(1 row)
```

##step Database setup

> Before you start coding, you need to set up a local PostgreSQL database (created in the previous step) for the indexer to store the extracted transaction data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 2: Sure that works 😃

```sh
diesel migration run --database-url $PSQL_URL
```

Then use the `diesel print-schema` command to generate the schema.rs file from the actual database.

```sh
diesel print-schema --database-url $PSQL_URL > src/schema.rs
```

Your `src/schema.rs` file should now look like the following:

{@inject: examples/rust/basic-sui-indexer/src/schema.rs}

After running the previous commands, your project is set up for the next steps:

- PostgreSQL now has a `transaction_digests` table with the defined columns.
- `src/schema.rs` contains automatically generated Rust code that represents this table structure.
- You can now write type-safe Rust code that talks to this specific table.

The Diesel's migration system evolves the database schema over time in a structured and version-controlled way. For a complete walkthrough, see the official Diesel [Getting Started guide](https://diesel.rs/guides/getting-started).

##step Create data structure

To simplify writes to Diesel, you can define a struct that represents a record on the `transaction_digests` table.

{@inject: examples/rust/basic-sui-indexer/src/models.rs}

Key annotations:

> - `FieldCount`: Required by `sui-indexer-alt-framework` for memory optimization and batch processing efficiency. It is used to limit the max size of a batch so that we don't exceed the postgres limit on the number of bind parameters a single SQL statement can have.

Author: Good catch. I missed it because no first person is a rule.

- `diesel(table_name = transaction_digests)`: Maps this Rust struct to the `transaction_digests` table, whose schema is generated in a previous step.
- `Insertable`: Allows this struct to be inserted into the database using Diesel.

> ##step Define the Handler struct in handler.rs

Author: Leaving for now per SG

Save the `handlers.rs` file.

<details>
<summary>
Processor trait definition
</summary>
{@inject: crates/sui-indexer-alt-framework/src/pipeline/processor.rs#trait=Processor}
</details>

##step Implement the Handler

The `Handler` trait defines how to commit data to the database. Add the dependencies and code after `Processor`.

{@inject: examples/rust/basic-sui-indexer/src/handlers.rs#handler}

How sequential batching works:

1. `process()` returns values for each checkpoint.
1. `batch()` accumulates values from multiple checkpoints.
1. `commit()` writes the batch when framework reaches limits (`H::MAX_BATCH_CHECKPOINTS`).

{@inject: crates/sui-indexer-alt-framework/src/pipeline/sequential/committer.rs#batch}

:::tip

You can override the default batch limits by implementing constants in your `Handler`.

:::

The `handlers.rs` file is now complete. Save the file.

<details>
<summary>
Complete `handler.rs` file
</summary>
{@inject: examples/rust/basic-sui-indexer/src/handlers.rs}
</details>

<details>
<summary>
Handler trait definition
</summary>
{@inject: crates/sui-indexer-alt-framework/src/pipeline/concurrent/mod.rs#trait=Handler}
</details>

> ##step Create .env file

Author: The style guide currently has do not use tics in headings.

> ##step Create .env file

Reviewer 2: Oh okay sorry I missed that, do we have a hard preference/reason for that?
